---
layout: post
title: monads for normal people in python and clojure
---

# {{ page.title }}

## dealing with null

here we have a series of functions with similar signatures: each takes one non-null argument, and each returns a value which may be null.

    def get_account(name):
        if name == "Irek": return 1
        elif name == "John": return 2
        else: return None

    def get_balance(account):
        if account == 1: return 1000000
        elif account == 2: return 75000
        else: return None

    def get_qualified_amount(balance):
        if balance > 200000: return balance
        else: return None

this is what business logic might look like that uses these functions:

    def get_loan(name):
        account = get_account(name)
        if not account:
            return None
        balance = get_balance(account)
        if not balance:
            return None
        loan = get_qualified_amount(balance)
        return loan

note that we're just applying these functions in order. data flow is like a unix pipe:

    name | get_account | get_balance | get_qualified_amount

which is the same thing as function composition:

    get_qualified_amount(get_balance(get_account("Irek"))) => 1000000
    get_qualified_amount(get_balance(get_account("John"))) => TypeError

both of these ways of expressing the business logic have maximum clarity, except in the case of an error, which causes something like a TypeError, NullPointerException, or segfault.

here's a way to abstract the repeated null checks. The m_ prefix on variables is to indicate that they are not a raw value, but they are a value which are specifically allowed to be null.

    def bind(v, f):
        if (v):
            return f(v)
        else:
            return None

    def qualified_amount(name):
        m_account = get_account(name)
        m_balance = bind(m_account, get_balance)
        m_loan =    bind(m_balance, get_loan)
        return m_loan

now we can get similarly clear "pipelined" business logic without explicit null checks:

    def m_pipeline(val, fns):
        m_val = val
        for f in fns:
            m_val = bind(m_val, f)
        return m_val

    >>> m_pipeline("Irek", [get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount])
    1000000
    >>> m_pipeline("John", [get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount])
    None

or with varargs for nicer syntax:

    def m_pipeline(val, *fns):
        m_val = val
        for f in fns:
            m_val = bind(m_val, f)
        return m_val


    >>> m_pipeline("Irek", get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount)
    1000000
    >>> m_pipeline("John", get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount) # => None

So that's cool right there, we can pipeline our business logic even though we need to inject error-handling plumbing between each function application. This pattern lets us compose functions that otherwise couldn't be composed because the types don't line up.

## error codes

A powerful effect of structuring our code in this way is that all the logic that packs and unpacks values into a type that may be null is not in the business logic. This means we can change the way we indicate errors to a more complex type without changing or adding complexity to the business logic.

lets refactor our API to return an error code explaining why a result is null.

    def success(val): return (val, None)
    def failure(err): return (None, err)

    def get_account(name):
        if name == "Irek": return success(1)
        elif name == "John": return success(2)
        else: return failure("No account associated with name '%s'" % name)

    def get_balance(account):
        if account == 1: return success(1000000)
        elif account == 2: return success(75000)
        else: return failure("No balance associated with account #%s" % account)

    def get_qualified_amount(balance):
        if balance > 200000: return success(balance)
        else: return failure("Insufficient funds for loan, current balance is %s" % balance)

so now our API signals success and failure via a complex return value:

    >>> get_account("Irek")
    (1, None)

    >>> get_balance(1)
    (1000000, None)

lets change `bind` to understand how to unpack our complex return value:

    def bind(mval, mf):
        value = mval[0]
        error = mval[1]

        if not error:
            return mf(value)
        else:
            return mval


    >>> bind((1, None), get_balance)
    (1000000, None)

note that `bind` requires us pass it a complex value, which it knows how to unpack into a simple value and optionally apply it to a function. When we use `chain`, the value we're passing in is typically a simple value, so chain needs to know how to turn a simple value into a complex value.

    def unit(val): return success(val)

    def m_pipeline(val, fns):
        m_val = unit(val)
        for f in fns:
            m_val = bind(m_val, f)
        return m_val


    >>> m_pipeline("Irek", get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount)
    (1000000, None)
    >>> m_pipeline("John", get_account, get_balance, get_qualified_amount)
    (None, 'Insufficient funds for loan, current balance is 75000')

The `unit` function for our first example, values that might be null, is trivial: python objects are already allowed to be null, so they are technically already a complex type of `value | None`. `unit` for maybe-null values is simply the identity function.

## generalized utility functions that work with all monads

A monad is a design pattern for abstracting out the plumbing necessary to compose functions of complex types. A monad is defined by the set of functions `bind` and `unit`.

    def identity(v): return v

    identity_m = {
        'bind': lambda mv,mf: mf(mv),
        'unit': identity
    }

    maybe_m = {
        'bind': lambda mv,mf: mf(mv) if mv else None,
        'unit': identity
    }

    error_m = {
        'bind': lambda mv, mf: mf(mv[0]) if mv[0] else mv,
        'unit': lambda v: (v, None)
    }

We can design general functions that understand the monad interface without depending on the implementation of the monad.

 - `m_pipeline`: pipe together a series of functions
 - `m_chain`: like pipe, but doesn't execute the pipe, just returns a function which is the composition of a series of functions
 - `m_reduce`: TODO
 - `m_fmap`: TODO
 - `m_map`: TODO

and we can use these definitions with general monad utility functions:

    with monad(identity_m):
        assert m_chain(lambda x:2*x, lambda x:2*x)(2) == 8

    with monad(maybe_m):
        assert m_chain(lambda x:2*x, lambda x:2*x)(2) == 8
        assert m_chain(lambda x:None, lambda x:2*x)(2) == None

    with monad(error_m):
        success = lambda val: unit(val)
        failure = lambda err: (None, err)

        assert m_chain(lambda x:success(2*x), lambda x:success(2*x))(2) == (8, None)
        assert m_chain(lambda x:failure("error"), lambda x:success(2*x))(2) == (None, "error")
        assert m_chain(lambda x:success(2*x), lambda x:failure("error"))(2) == (None, "error")

TODO: use the get-loan example here

## list-monad

    list_m = {
        'unit': lambda v: [v],
        'bind': lambda mv, mf: flatten(map(mf, mv))
    }

*handwaving* `bind` here does the same type of plumbing as for loops. map a function over a list. each function is of type `x -> [x]`. An example is the range function: `range(5) => [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]`.

    with monad(seq_m):
        assert bind(range(5), lambda x: unit(x*2)) == [0,2,4,6,8]

        # equivalent to [y for x in range(5) for y in range(x)]
        assert m_chain(range, range)(5) == [0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 3]
        assert bind(range(5), range) == [0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 3]


    def chessboard():
        ranks = list("abcdefgh")
        files = list("12345678")

        with monad(list_m):
            return bind(ranks, lambda rank:
                   bind(files, lambda file:
                           unit((rank, file))))

    assert len(chessboard()) == 64
    assert chessboard()[:3] == [('a', '1'), ('a', '2'), ('a', '3')]

TODO: bind-bind-unit pattern
TODO: add get-loan example

## monad transformers

This is where monads start to get powerful.

Monads can be stacked on top of each other. Best shown by example:

    (def seq-maybe-m (seq-t maybe-m))
    (with-monad seq-maybe-m
      )

List comprehension, where individual leaves can fail. Exceptions would ruin the entire list comprehension; we want the exception to be per-leaf. Show this work both ways. Show how nasty the code is without monads using, say, exceptions.

## fmap

list-monad defines the plumbing that makes for loops work. We can use this to generalize the concept of mapping:

    def m_fmap(f, mv):
        return bind(mv, lambda x: unit(f(x)))

`fmap` takes a function, and applies it inside a monad.

    with monad(maybe_m):
        assert m_fmap(lambda x:2*x, None) == None
        assert m_fmap(lambda x:2*x, 2) == 4

    with monad(seq_m):
        assert m_fmap(lambda x:2*x, range(5)) == [0,2,4,6,8]

Brief academic note: in category theory, a 'functor' is a function which maps a value from one type to another, e.g. `C -> D`. this is why fmap is so named: fmap applies a functor to a value, resulting in a value of a different type.

TODO:

 - map inside `(list-t maybe-m)`
 - map inside continuations

## writer-monad, reader-monad

 - deterministic logging
 - dependency injection

## state-monad

 - state machines
 - streams

## parser combinators

 - (def parser-m (state-t maybe-m))
 - backtracking

## continuation-monad

 - callbacks
 - call-cc
 - `(def beat-m (state-t cont-m))`
 - `(def async-m (seq-t maybe-t cont-m))`

## STM monad

 - from haskell
